[Music]
most people who go into the forest
enjoy trees and only few see
the mosses
[Music]
but in fact we have about 120 000
different species and about 1600
in europe of mosses alone because they
are tiny plants you
have to look very careful to see the
difference
and if you look close enough you will
notice that the moss
plants are a very little forest and this
is
one of their functions in nature as well
they are tiny forests for even
tinier animals like insects or bacteria
living in them so they are part of
today's ecosystem
and the soil where the trees are rooting
in
is over the million of years accumulated
debris of plants
but if you go back in time for 500
million years
all this would disappear no trees no
soil
only bare rock
so the first plants developed from green
algae from fresh water
and they had to cope with very harsh
environments
they had to develop novel innovations
a lot of genes which encode for
protective agents
which could protect these first plants
these mosses
from harsh stress like cold ice
heat uvb light
and with this capacity they really could
transform
earth to the way we know it so they gave
the oxygen into the air
which allowed animals to develop on land
and ultimately we as humans but they
persisted
since about 400 million years we know
mosses on earth
and they did not change much in shape
and nature
they saw the dinosaurs coming and going
and they saw us humans coming and if we
are not careful enough with our planet
they will see us going but the mosses
will persist probably
one of the fascinating characteristics
of mosses is that they are very adaptive
to different environments
and they can withstand drought
like resurrection plants and if you add
a bit of water
then they gloom up again they live up
again
[Music]
they are pioneer plants in the city as
well
and they get their nutrients from the
air and therefore they are able to
filter air as well
so they can take pollutants from the air
and use them for their own bioenergy
so one major step for biotechnologists
is to take a specific mosque from this
environment
very tiny faction bring it into the lab
and
establish a so-called lab culture so
without any contaminating other species
no bacteria no fungi
to analyze and utilize this specific
moss
and so you don't have to disturb anymore
the environment
you only take up a very tiny fraction
and then you make a propagation in the
lab of the pure moss
species
each moss has its peculiar needs
for temperature for nutrition
for ph and so this is a very difficult
task to transfer
a specific moss type more species from
nature
so it looks easy but it takes a lot of
efforts
personally i started very early so i
spent all my scientific life
working on mosses the moss fiscametria
patents was the most i started
with and which is now considered to be a
flagship model organism so we sequenced
in an international effort the whole
genome and in fact it was
the third plant genome ever sequenced
to total and what we discovered is for
example
that this specific moss has about 12 000
more
protein coding genes than humans have
one of the questions
of course when we discovered that fiscal
metrella and
in fact other mosses as well have so
many protein-coding genes
was what are they good for because
mosses don't have
roots they don't have flowers they don't
produce seeds
and what we find analyzing these genes
is
that they produce much more ingredients
bioactive
substances than for example flowering
plants
[Music]
one class of these special ingredients
mosses have
are polyunsaturated fatty acids and they
are
important for example for the human diet
but they are important for the moss
to cope with extreme environments so
they make
membranes smooth and flexible
[Music]
in winter for example you see that all
the plants
lose their leaves or they get brown but
mosses
still under eyes are green and making
photosynthesis and in fact
some years ago colleagues of mine from
canada found
living moss about 2 000 years covered by
ice by a glacier
and they were able to retrieve this moss
bring it to the lab and regrow it there
so it was still alive after
2000 years buried under ice
have the world's largest collections for
example for peat mosses called swagnum
mosses
and sphagnum mosses are very important
for nature
or for our whole planet because
peatlands store
double the amount of carbon then all
forests combined on earth so they are
important carbon storages
and they are very important for moisture
so they have specialized tissues the
mosses we see
for example protonema in the youth
stadium which is growing for example
here in the bioreactor which resembles
green algae in fresh water
and the most plant on this protonema has
stems and leaves and making erect growth
and
coping with photosynthesis and with the
sun
and each of these different stadiums
have different
chemical design in it for the specific
needs
and muscles are very resistant because
they have
more and specific ingredients with help
them to communicate with the environment
and to protect them from attack
[Music]
so a lot of medicine humans use but even
cosmetics
humans use depend on plant substances
and so far
still very few laboratories worldwide
work on mosses and we still
knew only a very tiny fraction of the
biodiversity of the different mosses
we have so many different moss species
in so many different parts of the world
so there's a lot of space and room to
discover to explore
even the biochemical diversity so we are
really
only at the beginning
you